Soon after barrages of rockets were fired from Gaza into Israel on Sunday morning, the Israeli military announced that a humanitarian lull in its Gaza offensive, which was meant to last through midnight, was over.

The military said in a statement shortly after 10 a.m. that it was resuming its aerial, naval and ground activity in the Gaza Strip “following Hamas’s incessant rocket fire throughout the humanitarian window.” Some Israeli politicians began talking of the possibility of escalating the Israeli offensive against Hamas and other Palestinian militant groups, now in its 20th day, as intense international efforts over the weekend to press for an immediate, broader cease-fire appeared to have failed.

Secretary of State John Kerry, left, spoke with France's foreign minister, Laurent Fabius, in Paris on Saturday.Israel Extends Cease-Fire in Gaza, a U.N. Request Rejected by HamasJULY 26, 2014
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel has so far not agreed to a broader cease-fire plan.Amid Outcry Abroad, a Wealth of Backing in Israel for Netanyahu

Pause in the Fighting Gives Civilians on Both Sides a Moment to Take Stock 
Lt. Col. Peter Lerner, a spokesman for the Israeli military, said that 25 rockets and mortar shells had been fired into Israel since 8 p.m. on Saturday, when an initial 12-hour cease-fire ended. Israel said it would hold its fire for an additional four hours while its cabinet met on Saturday night, then announced that, at the request of the United Nations, it would extend the lull for 24 hours. But Israel responded to some of the fire overnight with artillery fire toward Rafah, in southern Gaza, Colonel Lerner said.

The Israeli prime minister’s office said in a statement that the Israeli military was aiming to hit “terrorist” targets and that “if civilians are hurt unintentionally, Hamas will be responsible for that, after once more violating a proposal for a humanitarian lull that Israel agreed to.”

After listing previous violations of temporary cease-fires over the past few days, the statement accused Hamas of “making cynical use of Gaza’s civilians in order to use them as a human shield.”

The United Nations, it added, had requested an extension of the cease-fire to allow Gaza’s residents to prepare for the Eid al-Fitr holiday that ends the holy Muslim fasting month of Ramadan.

Hamas, the Islamic group that dominates Gaza and is leading the fighting against Israel, rejected the extension of the temporary truce on Saturday night, saying that any cease-fire that did not secure the withdrawal of Israeli forces from the Gaza Strip and allow residents to go back to their homes was unacceptable. Israel had said that it would maintain defensive positions in Gaza during the lull and continue to operate against Hamas’s underground tunnel network, which has been used by militants to infiltrate Israeli territory.

An Israeli reserve soldier was killed overnight by mortar fire from Gaza as he waited in a staging area along Israel’s border with Gaza, according to the military, bringing the total of Israeli soldiers killed since the beginning of the campaign on July 8 to 43. More than 1,000 Palestinians have been killed in Gaza, most of them civilians, according to the health ministry in Gaza and monitoring groups.

Seven rockets were fired into Israel on Sunday morning. Two were intercepted by Israel’s Iron Dome antimissile defense system and five fell in open ground, causing no injury or damage, according to the police.

Shaul Mofaz, a centrist member of the Israeli Parliament and a former military chief of staff and defense minister, told Ynet, a leading Hebrew news site, on Sunday that Israel had enough troops inside Gaza and stationed along the border to take the ground operation to “the next stage” and recommended “exacting a direct price from Hamas’s leadership.”

Seizing on the momentum of focused American airstrikes in recent days, Kurdish forces moved to retake the strategic Mosul Dam on Sunday night, in their most significant challenge yet to the Sunni militants’ advance in northern Iraq.

The American assaults hit 10 armed vehicles, seven Humvees, two armored personnel carriers and one checkpoint belonging to fighters of the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, the United States Central Command said Sunday.

In the past two days, United States forces have conducted 30 airstrikes across Iraq, officials said, with many of them focused around the dam, which militants captured after routing the Kurdish forces 10 days ago. A statement from the National Security Council in Washington on Sunday said that the bombings were ordered by President Obama to help the Iraqi forces “retake and establish control over the Mosul Dam.”

As of late Sunday, Kurdish government officials said fighting around the dam complex, Iraq’s largest, was continuing, despite early reports that the site had been retaken.

“We do not control the entire dam yet,” said Fuad Hussein, a spokesman for Massoud Barzani, the Iraqi Kurdish president, in a televised statement.

The air campaign has seemed to check the militants’ move against the semiautonomous Kurdish region, an offensive that sent tens of thousands of refugees fleeing and at one point threatened the Kurdish capital, Erbil.

By hammering the militants with warplanes and drones, the Americans have severely curtailed the freedom of movement enjoyed by the ISIS fighters.

It remains to be seen how the Kurdish forces, known as the pesh merga, may fare if the air support is halted, despite Mr. Obama’s suggestion that it could last for months. Having lost significant ground during the ISIS fighters’ sudden advance this month, Kurdish forces have shown that they may not be able to go it alone. The forces pushing into the Mosul Dam area are believed to include the Iraqi Special Forces, making the operation a hybrid of American, Kurdish and Iraqi commands.

Kurdish officials acknowledge that the airstrikes have been vital to recent success in halting the militants’ onslaught. For their part, pesh merga officials have complained bitterly about inferior arms compared with those used by the militants, who have claimed powerful American munitions abandoned on the battlefield by the Iraqi military.

“The aircrafts have handicapped the ISIS forces — they cannot move easily,” said Hariam Agha, a local commander of the Kurdish forces in Dohuk. “They killed a lot of their fighters.”

Since Saturday, 13 militants have been killed in airstrikes and 46 have been wounded, medical officials in the area said.

According to Kurdish officials, ISIS fighters now appear to be falling back on several fronts, as pesh merga forces approach both the dam and the city of Mosul, which is the capital of Nineveh Province. In their wake, they have left mines to slow the progress of Kurdish and Iraqi government forces following in their tracks. The Kurdish advance appeared to have been halted on Sunday afternoon, as local fighters and officials said they were awaiting sapper teams to clear the way to the dam.

Still, in Alqosh, at the military base where the operations to retake the dam originated, there was a decidedly optimistic attitude among the government fighters. Several offered to speak to reporters visiting the area, but only if they were not identified because they were not authorized to comment publicly. The soldiers spoke of an imminent victory at the dam as military vehicles passed in and out of the checkpoint area.

Officials also spoke confidently about the re-energized pesh merga forces.

“There is some fighting in different places in the area, but the pesh merga has moved easily forward,” said Duraid Hikmat Tobia, a minority affairs adviser to the governor of Nineveh Province. “The problem is the mines — they cannot move quickly because they are afraid to hit them.”

“Still,” he added, “I think tonight or tomorrow the Mosul Dam will be controlled by the pesh merga.”

The dam sits on the Tigris River roughly 30 miles from Mosul and is a crucial source of electricity for Mosul as well as a control point for the water supply for a larger area. After the dam fell early this month, officials worried that if it failed a 65-foot wave of water could be released over northern Iraq.

But rather than use the dam as a weapon against residents of the region, the militants continued to produce electricity and maintain the site.

Gov. Jay Nixon announced early Monday that he would deploy the Missouri National Guard to this St. Louis suburb as part of a fresh attempt by the authorities to quell the unrest that has paralyzed the town since an unarmed black teenager was killed by a white police officer.

Mr. Nixon said in a statement that he chose to activate the National Guard because of “deliberate, coordinated and intensifying violent acts.”

“Tonight, a day of hope, prayers and peaceful protests was marred by the violent criminal acts of an organized and growing number of individuals, many from outside the community and state, whose actions are putting the residents and businesses of Ferguson at risk,” Mr. Nixon said.

The governor’s decision came after the worst night of violence since the unrest began.

A detail from a report showing the entry, and re-entry and exit wounds from six bullets.Autopsy Shows Michael Brown Was Struck at Least 6 TimesAUG. 17, 2014
Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. last month. He was set to brief President Obama, returning in Washington, on Monday.Obama Administration Plans Autopsy of Michael Brown in Effort to Keep PeaceAUG. 17, 2014
Capt. Ronald S. Johnson of the Missouri State Highway Patrol on Friday in Ferguson, Mo.The Media Equation: View of #Ferguson Thrust Michael Brown Shooting to National AttentionAUG. 17, 2014
Garland Moore on Friday in Ferguson, where he once lived. He said area residents were “tired of the police harassment.”Deep Tensions Rise to Surface After Ferguson ShootingAUG. 16, 2014
video Video: A Protest IgnitedAUG. 16, 2014
On Sunday night, hours before the start of a second day of a mandatory curfew that the governor had ordered, police officers came under assault from gunfire and firebombs and responded with their largest show of force so far.

Using a barrage of tear gas and smoke canisters, and firing rubber bullets and deploying hundreds of officers in riot gear to sweep the streets of protesters, the law enforcement officials had the situation largely under control by the time the curfew began at midnight.

Protesters said that the police acted without provocation. But at a news conference about an hour into the curfew, Ronald S. Johnson, the Missouri Highway Patrol captain brought in by the governor to take over security here, blamed “premeditated criminal acts” that were intended to provoke the police for the flare-up of violence.

“We had to act to protect lives and property,” he said.

Captain Johnson said that some demonstrators throughout Ferguson had opened fire on the police, hurled Molotov cocktails and looted and vandalized local businesses.

But it appeared that an attempted attack by some protesters on the shopping center the police have used as a command center prompted the most severe response from the authorities.

Captain Johnson said that at 8:56 p.m., hundreds of protesters had descended upon the area of the command post. Soon, he said, “multiple Molotov cocktails were thrown at police.” The police responded with tear gas.

The captain said that after that episode, the police had received reports that a McDonald’s restaurant had been seized by the demonstrators. Meanwhile, police officers were being targeted with bottles, Captain Johnson told reporters.

“Based on these conditions, I had no alternative but to elevate the level of our response,” he said.

Op-Ed Contributor: In Ferguson, Black Town, White PowerAUG. 17, 2014
Charles M. BlowOp-Ed Columnist: Frustration in FergusonAUG. 17, 2014
A spokesman for the Highway Patrol said the authorities had made seven or eight arrests, and Captain Johnson said he believed three people – none of them police officers – had been injured in the outbreak of violence.

The violence occurred along West Florissant Avenue, one of the city’s main streets, near an area that the police had partitioned for the news media, and within two blocks of where Michael Brown, the unarmed black teenager, was killed on Aug. 9.

Key Smith, 46, a veteran who served in Iraq, said that he, his wife and their 7-year-old son had traveled two hours from Fort Valley, Ga., to attend a church rally to honor Mr. Brown and that they were caught up in the violence as they were trying to get home.

“I just came out to see a peaceful rally,” Mr. Smith said. “It takes away from his death, his memory.”

Mr. Smith said he did not blame the police for their response. “You have to disperse the crowd if the crowd gets wild,” he said. “This is getting out of hand. It’s kind of sad that it’s come to this. If you really want to hit them in the right way, get out there and vote.”

After the initial barrage of tear gas, the police formed into ranks and moved down the street, pushing the protesters from the area.

Scattered clashes and violence had flared early Sunday morning during the first hours of the curfew, which began at midnight and continued to 5 a.m. But the trouble Sunday evening was in sharp contrast to the mood of the rest of the day. At churches across the area, ministers, the police and civil rights figures joined parishioners in trying to tamp down the anger that has followed the death of Mr. Brown.

In a packed sanctuary at Greater Grace Church, not far from the site of evening demonstrations, Captain Johnson, who grew up in the area, spoke with the cadence of a preacher as he apologized to the family of the teenager. “My heart goes out to you, and I say that I’m sorry,” Captain Johnson said. “I wear this uniform, and I should stand up here and say that I’m sorry.”

Before a mostly black audience, Captain Johnson, who is African-American, spoke of his own “black son, who wears his pants saggy, wears his hat cocked to the side and has tattoos on his arms.” He added, “That’s my baby.”

“Michael’s going to make it better for our sons so they can be better black men,” he said, predicting that the treatment of black youths here would change. “We need to pray. We need to thank Michael for his life. And we need to thank him for the change that he is going to make.”

Time and again, he won applause. But in a vivid display of the challenges faced by the authorities in this tumultuous city of 21,000 that has become the center of a national debate about race and policing, a large crowd outside continued to protest Mr. Brown’s death. The shooting of the teenager by a white officer, Darren Wilson, is the subject of inquiries by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the St. Louis County police.

Seven people were arrested early Sunday on the first night of the curfew and accused of failing to disperse, and one man was critically wounded in an overnight shooting, apparently by another protester. The authorities said the police had not opened fire.

Officials extended the curfew for another night and said they would decide each day whether to continue to enforce it.

Earlier Sunday, well before the unrest of the night, civil rights organizations called on Governor Nixon to rescind the state of emergency and the curfew in Ferguson.

The American Civil Liberties Union, the Lawyers’ Committee for Civil Rights Under Law and the N.A.A.C.P. Legal Defense Fund said in a statement that the governor’s action “suspends the constitutional right to assemble by punishing the misdeeds of the few through the theft of constitutionally protected rights of the many.”

“We need more protest, expression, discussion and debate — not less,” the statement said.

Parishioners at a service at The New Jerusalem Missionary and Baptist Church in Ferguson, Mo. Credit Eric Thayer for The New York Times
In St. Louis, about 100 people turned out in a show of support for Officer Wilson, according to local media reports.

In churches here, the calls for calm continued.

At the Greater St. Mark Family Church in Ferguson, the state attorney general, Chris Koster, said he came to pray and grieve. “You have lost a member of your community at the hands of a member of my community,” he said. “Not just the Caucasian community, but the law enforcement community. And that is painful to every good-hearted person in this city.”

He said he feared that the armored vehicle the police used on West Florissant Avenue was a symbol of the armor that had grown between the black community and law enforcement.

“This week is a 50-year flood of anger that has broken loose in this city, the likes of which we have not seen since Dr. King was killed,” he said, referring to the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. “And I am sorry that I have not done more from the law enforcement community to break down that wall of anger, that wall of armor.”

At the Sunday morning service at New Jerusalem Missionary Baptist Church, about 40 people gathered. Jaquan Vassel, 24, the church deacon, played a video on a screen hanging above the pulpit that he had seen the night before on his Facebook feed. In it, two black men were reading from the Book of Psalms during a protest on West Florissant Avenue. “I commend them for trying to look to God,” Mr. Vassel told the congregants, “but you hear the anger in their voices.”

“They are angry at the police officers,” he added. “We have to show them how to forgive, just like God forgave us.”

Forgiveness was also emphasized by Alonso Adams Jr., the assistant pastor of the church, who spoke after Mr. Vassel. “How many of us have killed people with our lips?” he asked. “How many brothers and sisters, white or black, have we defamed with our words?”

Mr. Adams acknowledged the anger toward the police, in particular toward Officer Wilson. But, the pastor added, “If he came into this church this morning and asked Jerusalem to forgive him, how many of you would offer up your arms?”

And later at Greater Grace Church, where cars were lined up for at least a mile, the Rev. Al Sharpton called the killing of Mr. Brown “a defining moment on how this country deals with policing and the rights of its citizens to address how police behave in this country.”

Mr. Sharpton recalled Marlene Pinnock, a black woman who was assaulted by an officer in Los Angeles this summer; Eric Garner, a black man in Staten Island who was put in a chokehold by an officer and who later died; and the death of Mr. Brown, saying: “We have had enough.”

One woman in the crowd raised a handwritten sign that equated the Ferguson Police Department with the Ku Klux Klan.

Mr. Sharpton admonished the crowd not to loot in Mr. Brown’s name. “We are not looters,” he said. “We are liberators.”

ISIL closes in on border town with Turkey

ISIL fighters close in on the key Kurdish town of Kobane, as Turkey considers sending troops to both Iraq and Syria.
 
Fighters from the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) have closed in on a key Kurdish town in Syria, next to the border with Turkey, prompting the government in Ankara to deploy tanks to protect its territory.

Al Jazeera's Bernard Smith, reporting from Suruc close to Turkey's southern border, said ISIL fighters had moved within two kilometres of Kobane.

Turkish tanks and armoured vehicles had taken up positions near its border on Monday, after shells and mortars from Syria hit Turkish villages.

At least 15 tanks were positioned, some with their guns pointing towards Syrian territory. 

Intensified shelling in and around Kobane has angered Kurds on the Turkish side of the border, who said the government of President Recep Tayyip Erdogan was not doing enough to stop the assault.

Smith said Prime Minister Ahmet Davutoglu was expected to meet military commanders on Tuesday to spell out Turkey’s strategy against ISIL.

"The prime minister is expected to present two motions to parliament authorising Turkish forces to operate in both Iraq and Syria, and to allow foreign forces to use Turkish soil in operations againct ISIL," he said.

The government previously said it would submit motions to parliament authorising armed forces to take action in Iraq and Syria, so Ankara could join the US-led coalition against the IS fighters.

Turkey had previously refused to join a broad anti-ISIL coalition led by the US while dozens of its citizens, including diplomats and children, were being held after being abducted from the Turkish consulate in the northern Iraqi city of Mosul. The Turks were released earlier this month.

Activists reported US-led coalition air strikes on Tuesday attacking three ISIL-held villages eight kilometres west of Kobane, and one air strike targeting an ISIL base in the eastern suburb of Kobane.

On Monday, the British-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said air strikes had hit mills and grain storage areas in the northern Syrian town of Manbij, in an area also controlled by ISIL.

Strikes on a building on a road leading out of the town also killed a number of ISIL fighters, said Rami Abdulrahman, who runs the observatory, which gathers information from sources in Syria.

The US military said on Monday that a US air strike targeted ISIL vehicles in a staging area adjacent to a grain storage facility near Manbij.

The observatory reported that 10 air raids also targeted various parts of the province of Idlib, killing at least one child and six others, including five members of the same family.

The purported civilian casualties would add to the 19 civilians that the observatory says have already been killed in raids against the group.

Tens of thousands of pro-democracy protesters have turned parts of Hong Kong into a massive street party on Monday night, with the mood turning festive just a day after riot police fired tear gas in ugly clashes.

The huge crowds defied government calls to go home after Sunday's chaotic scenes, bringing key districts of the Asian financial hub to a standstill as they vowed to stay put until the Chinese government grants them free elections.

Sunday's violence saw riot police fire clouds of tear gas as they struggled to control the protesters, in one of the biggest ever challenges to Beijing's rule of the semi-autonomous city.

The anger gave way to a lighter atmosphere on Monday night as riot police retreated, leaving huge masses of protesters in control of at least four major thoroughfares around the city.

Although there were few police on the scene, some protesters feared a repeat of Sunday's clashes, donning goggles and masks to protect themselves against tear gas.

The demonstrators are furious over last month's announcement by Beijing that while it will allow the city's next leader to be elected in 2017, it will insist on picking the candidates, with critics branding the move a "fake democracy".

Public anger over rampant inequality is also at its highest in years in a city once renowned for its stability.

'Umbrella revolution'

Cantonese pop music filled the air during the second day of what some are dubbing the "umbrella revolution", as protesters have been using the canopies as shields against tear gas and the scorching sun alike.


China vows not to tolerate dissent, blocks Instagram
One British sympathiser won huge cheers as he set up a barbecue and began handing out hamburgers and sausages to the protesters.

"I saw everybody was just standing around and just eating bread and bananas and I thought, 'These guys have been here for 24 hours now, and everybody needs cooked food'," Daniel Shepherd, a finance broker by day, told AFP news agency.

"Firing tear gas at students that are unarmed, I think, seems a bit excessive," added the 32-year-old.

The crowds hoisted up a makeshift copy of the "goddess of democracy" statue that graced the 1989 protests in Beijing's Tiananmen Square, while lamp posts were adorned with yellow ribbons - which, like the umbrella, have become a symbol of the movement.

But many Hong Kongers expressed frustration at the huge disruption the protests have caused, with the crowds blocking key junctions in the busy Causeway Bay and Mongkok shopping districts as well as the biggest protest site in Admiralty.

There was chaos on the transport network, shuttering many businesses, with schools in two central districts set to close for a second day on Tuesday.

Some social workers and teachers also went on strike after the Hong Kong Confederation of Trade Unions (HKCTU) and the Professional Teachers' Union (PTU) called for members to take action, the South China Morning Post reported.

Political headache for China

Analysts said the protests put the Chinese government in an extremely difficult position.

Communist authorities are worried that dealing with the protests too softly could encourage wider protests for greater freedoms on the mainland.

But a heavy-handed response could spark an international outcry.

"It has the potential to be such a major crisis," said Christopher Hughes, a China expert at the London School of Economics.

He warned that Hong Kong could see a repeat of China's violent crackdown on the Tiananmen Square protests.

"If they did decide to send in the tanks, who could stop them?" he asked.

"They did it in 1989 and got away with it and they're a lot more powerful now. There would be some negative impact, some business confidence, but how long will that last?"

The United States urged Hong Kong's leaders to "exercise restraint". Former colonial power Britain also expressed concern, calling for "constructive" talks to end the standoff.

Beijing moved swiftly to wipe mentions of the protests from Chinese social media - blocking photo-sharing service Instagram altogether - and reiterated its hardline stance, opposing the demonstrators' "illegal" actions.

Al Jazeera's Adrian Brown, reporting from Beijing, confirmed the outage saying "many photos from the protests were being posted on the app, and it seems that China wants to starve this story of oxygen".

He added that other blogs that mention the words "occupy" and "central" were also having problems.